SEAlign: Alignment Training for Software Engineering Agent
Kechi Zhang† , Huangzhao Zhang, Ge Li† ∗ , Jinliang You† , Jia Li† , Yunfei Zhao† , Zhi Jin† ∗
† Key

Lab of High Confidence Software Technology (PKU), Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
China
{zhangkechi,lige,zhijin}@pku.edu.cn

arXiv:2503.18455v1 [cs.SE] 24 Mar 2025

Abstract
Recent advances in code generation models have demonstrated
impressive capabilities in automating software development tasks,
yet these models still struggle in real-world software engineering
scenarios. Although current training methods, particularly posttraining, excel at solving competitive programming problems, they
fail to adequately prepare models for the complexities of practical
software development. This misalignment raises the critical question: Are existing alignment training methods well suited for realworld software engineering tasks? In this study, we identify this
issue and propose SEAlign, a novel alignment framework designed
to bridge the gap between code generation models and real-world
software development tasks. SEAlign leverages the unique characteristics of software engineering processes, including high-quality
workflow steps, to enhance model capabilities. Our framework further employs Monte Carlo Tree Search for fine-grained alignment in
multi-step decision processes, followed by preference optimization
on critical actions to ensure models meet real-world requirements.
We evaluate SEAlign on three standard agentic benchmarks for realworld software engineering, including HumanEvalFix, SWE-BenchLite, and SWE-Bench-Verified. Experimental results demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance with minimal training overhead. In addition, we develop an agent-based software development platform
using SEAlign, which successfully automates the creation of several
small applications. Human evaluations of these applications highlight significant improvements in both task performance and user
experience. Our findings underscore the potential of SEAlign to
accelerate the adoption of large code models in real-world software
development. We believe that this research makes a meaningful
step towards fully automated software engineering. 1

1

Introduction

Code generation has become a pivotal area in artificial intelligence,
with models automating essential software development tasks and
significantly boosting developer productivity. Recent advances in
code models (such as GPT-4 [6], LLaMA [19], and DeepSeekCoder
[9] ), have shown impressive abilities to generate functional and
effective code. These models have greatly improved automation
in various code-related tasks, making software development more
efficient.
Current code generation models, i.e., Large Language Models
(LLMs), typically follow a two-stage training process: ❶ pre-training,
where the model learns basics of programming languages and foundational skills, and ❷ post-training, where the model learns to
follow specific instructions and is aligned with human behaviors
∗ Corresponding
1 Code

authors.
and additional details are available at [2].

and preferences. Recent alignment training techniques for code
models, such as CodeDPO [43] and LIMO [40], have been proven
highly effective, achieving significant improvements with minimal
data and computational resources in certain scenarios. However,
the post-training phase of existing code generation models focuses
mainly on solving competitive programming contest problems from
platforms like LeetCode [15] and Codeforces [4] – there is a significant gap between algorithmic problems and real-world software
development scenarios. Practical software engineering demands a
composite of various skills, including the retrieval of information
from complex repositories and the flexible application of existing
algorithms to current code contexts, etc., but existing post-training
solutions often perform poorly. Bridging this gap is crucial for accelerating the adoption of code models in software development
automation.
Despite the rapid advancements in model capabilities which
have surpassed the majority of human programmers on competitive coding benchmarks, these models often struggle in real-world
software development scenarios as aforementioned. Benchmarks
such as SWE-bench [12], which simulates real-world scenarios of
issue fixing, reveal that many open-source code models perform
less satisfactorily. This discrepancy raises an important question:
Are current code model training schemes (specifically post-training
techniques) capable to aligned the models with the skills required
for real-world software development well? To answer the question
in a brief and straightforward manner, we conduct a preliminary
investigation, evaluating Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct-14B [10] (which
is a powerful code model extensively post-trained) and Openhands
[33] (which is a popular agentic framework) against SWE-BenchLite [12] (which is a benchmark simulating real-world software
engineering tasks). The experiment shows that the model could
only solve 3.7% of problems within the benchmark. Diving into the
failure cases, we find that the incapability of the model is mainly
caused by ❶ the poor instruction following ability, ❷ the incorrect tool selection and usage, and ❸ infinite agentic loops (refer
to Section 3.2 for more analysis). Our preliminary investigation
results directly reveal that existing post-training methods do not
adequately prepare models for the complexities of software engineering tasks, especially within agentic framework.
To address this issue, we propose SEAlign, a novel framework designed to align code models with real-world software development
agentic workflows. SEAlign focuses on the unique characteristics of
software engineering, enhancing models’ ability to handle complex
tasks. In general, SEAlign enables code models to follow instructions and use developing tools correctly by tuning them under
real-world tasks. Specifically, we collect high-quality samples of
software development agentic trajectories (i.e., decision processes),
identify critical action steps in the workflow, and force the model to

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

produce “good” behaviors by alignment. SEAlign uses Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) to provide detailed scoring and alignment for
these multi-step decision processes, followed by preference optimization to ensure the model meets real-world requirements.
We evaluate SEAlign on three standard benchmarks for realworld software engineering tasks: HumanEvalFix [24], SWE-BenchLite, and SWE-Bench-Verified [25]. Experimental results show that
SEAlign achieves state-of-the-art performance with minimal training overhead. With 14B-parameter model, we achieve resolved
rates of 17.7% and 21.8% on SWE-Bench-Lite and SWE-BenchVerified. This performance represents the best results among models with comparable parameters within open-source methods. Furthermore, SEAlign achieves performance comparable to several
commercial products with only hundreds of optimization training samples, highlighting its efficiency and practicality. Inspired by
projects like OpenHands [33], we also build an agent-based software
development platform using SEAlign, which has already automated
the creation of multiple trivial applications. Human evaluations of
these constructed applications demonstrate significant improvements in both effectiveness and user experience, highlighting the
potential of SEAlign to accelerate software automated development.
The key contributions of our work are listed below:
• We conduct a comprehensive analysis of existing code generation models, revealing a significant misalignment issue between
existing training methods and the requirements from real-world
software development agentic tasks.
• We propose a novel alignment framework specifically designed
for real-world software engineering agentic workflows, namely
SEAlign. It employs a fine-grained alignment method utilizing
MCTS for multi-step processes, and subsequently aligns with
real-world requirements through preference optimization.
• We carry out experiments on three standard benchmarks for realworld software engineering agents, i.e., HumanEvalFix, SWEBench-Lite, and SWE-Bench-Verified, demonstrating SEAlign’s
state-of-the-art performance with minimal training overhead.
SEAlign enables code models to understand and use existing
software engineering agentic workflows, making the ultimate sweet
fruit of fully automated software development much more feasible.
Hopefully, this research could inspire subsequent researchers and
contribute to the ultimate realization of the goal.

2 Related Work
2.1 Large Language Models for Code
Code generation, where models produce source code snippets from
natural language (NL) descriptions, has been a hot-spot research
area in recent years [42]. LLMs have shown remarkable capabilities
in this domain, which can be attributed to their extensive training
on diverse datasets [20]. These models are often further fine-tuned
through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to maximize their coding
potential and other abilities [45]. Given the challenges associated
with collecting high-quality training data for SFT, researchers have
increasingly turned to self-instruct methods. In these techniques,
the most powerful LLMs are employed to synthesize instruction

Trovato et al.

Figure 1: Observed cases of misalignment in existing code
models and agentic frameworks.

data [21, 34, 35]. For instance, Evol-Instruct [21] makes use of complex prompts to improve the quality of the synthesized data. OSSinstruct [35], on the other hand, leverages real-world code snippets
to enhance the relevance and practicality of the generated data.
The pre-training stage endows LLMs with excellent language and
programming abilities, while the SFT stage enables them to follow
instructions and complete a series of downstream tasks. Researchers
have thoroughly demonstrated that LLMs have achieved humanlevel performance on competitive programming benchmarks and
beyond [16, 26], such as HumanEval [3] and LiveCodeBench [11].
To master the more complicated tasks that originate from real-world
scenarios, post-training techniques are then introduced.

2.2

Alignment Post-Training for Code Models

While pre-training equips code models with foundational knowledge of programming and SFT improves their instruction following
capabilities, post-training techniques adapt models to perform well
in diverse and complex applications [13]. Recent research has increasingly highlighted the critical role of alignment training in
shaping model performance and user experience, as evidenced by
models such as ChatGPT and DeepSeek-R1 [8]. In the realm of code,
alignment training remains in its nascent stage. Code-Optimise [5],
CodeDPO [43] and PLUM [41] construct post-training datasets from
trivial programming problems, and align code models to perform
greatly in such competitive programming tasks. However, these
methods concentrate on solving algorithmic problems from platforms such as LeetCode and Codeforces [4, 15]. While valuable,
they do not fully capture the complexities inherent in real-world
software development. Beyond writing algorithmic code, practical
software engineering demands a broader range of skills, e.g., navigating complex codebases, adapting and rewriting code snippets to
specific contexts, and restructuring software architecture [12, 44].
This gap between competitive programming and real-world software development underscores the need for more comprehensive
alignment training methods tailored to practical software engineering agentic workflows.

SEAlign: Alignment Training for Software Engineering Agent

3

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

A Motivating Example

We present a motivating example to elaborate on the misalignment
issue within current LLMs for code. Despite their great performance under algorithmic code generation, LLMs still struggle in
benchmarks simulating real-world scenarios.

3.1

Code Agents & Agentic Tasks

LLMs have demonstrated impressive performance in various coderelated tasks, such as code completion, code summarization, and
code generation [1]. However, they can mostly be considered as
standalone tasks, since LLMs are evaluated to solve trivial problems without requiring external knowledge or interacting with
the environment. Taking competitive programming as an example, the desired algorithmic code snippets are typically short and
independent of other libraries or packages.
On the contrary, in the real-world, developers usually work with
specific code environments to tackle different software engineering
tasks [44]. They are supposed to extend functionalities based on existing contexts, locate and fix run-time errors, as well as review code
commits from others, etc. All these complex tasks require the ability to navigate large codebases, understand software architecture,
and generate contextually appropriate code snippets. It is clearly
impractical and impossible to feed the entire codebase into LLMs,
as this would exceed their maximum context and computational
limitations.
To address real-world requirements, researchers have begun
to explore agentic frameworks for handling complex tasks [12,
44]. Agentic systems such as OpenHands [33], SWE-Agent [39],
CodeAgent [44], and AutoCodeRover [46] have demonstrated significant potential in addressing complex software engineering tasks.
SWE-Bench [12] further provides a real-world software engineering benchmark by collecting GitHub issues and evaluating LLMs to
address them (e.g., fixing bugs or adding new features for specific
repositories). These agentic solutions enable LLMs to autonomously
explore and interact with the environment, with multiple predefined programming tools and workflow constraints. For example,
in the OpenHands framework [33], agents often need numerous interactive rounds to resolve a task. Upon initialization, the LLM reads
the task prompt (𝑝) and generates its first action (𝑎 1 ). Subsequently,
in each round (𝑖), the LLM interacts with the environment by invoking a tool using its output (𝑎𝑖 ), and the environment responds
with an observation (𝑜𝑖 ) that reflects the changes resulting from
the tool invocation. The complete process of the LLM resolving a
task can be characterized by the following trajectory:
Trajectory = ⟨𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑜 2, . . . ⟩

(1)

where the entire trajectory is typically very long, reflecting the
complexity of real-world software engineering tasks. Furthermore,
real-world code projects exhibit a high degree of diversity and context dependency. This complexity presents a significant challenge in
constructing datasets and training LLM that can generalize across
different complex scenarios.

3.2

Failure Caused by Misalignment

After introducing agentic frameworks and defining trajectories, we
conduct a preliminary experiment to show the misalignment issue

of existing LLMs for code, and further analyze their failure cases.
Specifically, we adopt Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct-14B [10] as the code
model and Openhands [33] as the agentic framework. We evaluate
the constructed agent against the SWE-Bench-Lite benchmark [12].
To our shock, the agent can only resolve 3.7% of problems within
the benchmark. After diving into the failure cases (as shown in
Figure 1), we find that one of the major causes of failures is that
the base LLM can hardly follow the complicated instructions from
the agentic framework. Besides, the LLM often fails during tool
invocation (e.g., select incorrect tools or use tool erroneously), and
gets stuck in action loops (e.g., infinitely repeat one action). We
analyze these three main failure causes as below.
Failure of Instruction Following. The prompts in agentic frameworks are usually rather complicated. Due to the difficulty of the
real-world tasks, the prompts often include additional information
such as output constraints (the first issue in Fig. 1), and workflow
stages (the second issue in Fig. 1), etc. Although existing alreadyaligned code models perform well on standalone tasks, they frequently misinterpret such complex prompts or fail to execute multistep instructions that require understanding context, navigating
codebases, or invoking external tools. This limitation highlights
a critical gap between their objectives during training and the demands of practical software engineering tasks.
Incorrect Tool Invocation. Another common failure mode is that
LLMs invoke tools erroneously. E.g., an LLM may select an incorrect
tool from the available options or invoke a tool in an improper
manner (such as using the wrong parameter in the third issue in
Fig. 1). Nevertheless, real-world software engineering tasks often
require LLMs to invoke and interact with appropriate tools, such as
text editors, linters, or search engines. Existing LLMs often make
suboptimal choices during tool invocation, resulting in incomplete
or incorrect solutions. This issue highlights the critical need for
better alignment between LLMs and the tools they are intended to
use.
Stuck in Agentic Loop. In addition to the above two reasons, the
agentic system has the tendency to get stuck in repetitive or unproductive loops. E.g., as shown in Fig. 1, an LLM might repeatedly
attempt the same action without making progress, or generate a
sequence of actions irrelevant to the task. This behavior is particularly problematic in long trajectories, where the model’s inability
to jump out of such loops often leads to task failure or excessive
computational costs.

4

SEAlign

We introduce SEAlign as a novel alignment training framework
designed to enhance code models for modern software engineering
agentic systems. Unlike traditional alignment solutions that focus
on standalone algorithmic code generation tasks, SEAlign aligns
LLMs’ core capabilities with specific agentic frameworks to better
address real-world software development challenges. SEAlign is
not only robust but also training-efficient, making it a feasible and
practical option for applications.
The framework of SEAlign uses partial trajectory pairs to posttrain LLMs. To collect these pairs with preference, we thoughtfully design a trajectory tree pipeline. Figure 2 elaborates the overall framework of SEAlign. ❶ Trajectory Dataset Collection.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Trovato et al.

Figure 2: An overall pipeline of SEAlign (best viewed in color). Our framework involves four steps: ❶ collecting agentic trajectory
dataset from real-world software engineering environments, namely SWE-Gym [28], ❷ aggregating all sampled trajectories
and constructing trajectory trees, ❸ scoring nodes within trajectory trees and extracting partial trajectory pairs with significant
impact, and ❹ optimizing model preference with critical nodes. After these steps, we can finally obtain a well-aligned agentic
LLM. Note that in step ❹, it is usual to SFT the LLM before DPO as a warmup for the instruction following. To facilitate viewing,
we do not include the SFT part in the pipeline figure.
We sample trajectories produced by agents constructed with topperforming LLMs and state-of-the-art agentic frameworks. Each
trajectory consists of a sequence of actions and the final result. The
trajectories are scored based on their corresponding resolved results
(1 for success and 0 for failure). ❷ Trajectory Tree Construction.
For each task, we gather all sampled trajectories to construct a trajectory tree. In this tree, identical action nodes (e.g., tool calls and
model outputs) are merged, transforming individual agent decision
chains into a unified tree structure. Such a trajectory tree can be
considered an MCTS tree, where each path from the root to a leaf
node refers to a plausible sample of a complete agent execution
process. ❸ Node Scoring and Critical Action Identification.
We design a scoring mechanism for nodes in the MCTS tree. Each
intermediate node is scored based on the success rate of all paths in
its subtree. After scoring every node, we identify actions that significantly impact the final outcome, which we define as critical agent
actions. ❹ Alignment Training with Preference Optimization.
we propose a specialized alignment training approach for agents.
Focusing on the identified critical agent actions, we perform finegrained preference optimization. We expect the aligned LLM to
produce more “good” actions and less “bad” ones. More specifically,
“good” actions lead to a higher success rate while “bad” ones tend
to fail. We align the model with correct agent trajectories, thereby
ensuring that it learns to prioritize effective decision-making paths.
This approach achieves strong performance with minimal training
data and computational cost.

4.1

Trajectory Dataset Collection

To initiate model alignment, we follow existing work [28], where
a training dataset with human-validated execution environments
tailored for SWE-Bench-style tasks is provided. Based on this, we
construct an initial trajectory dataset derived from high-performing
models such as GPT-4o [7] and DeepSeek-v3 [17]. These models’
interactions within various software engineering agentic frameworks are collected to represent a series of decision-making steps
taken by agents (i.e., invocations of tools).
Each trajectory is paired with its corresponding final result, determined by whether the task succeeds (i.e., passes all test cases). To
avoid data leakage, we carefully exclude all repositories included in
our evaluation benchmarks (SWE-Bench [12] and HumanEvalFix
[24]). Every collected trajectory can then be formulated as below:

Trajectory = {⟨𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑜 2, . . . ⟩, res} , where res ∈ {1, 0} (2)
where res is a binary value, referring to the resolved result. To
ensure data integrity, we perform necessary de-duplication on the
constructed trajectories.

4.2

Trajectory Tree Construction

SEAlign builds trajectory trees for the purpose of scoring and gathering nodes with impacts. We observe frequent overlaps in the
decision steps across different trajectories. This leads to the idea
of merging identical steps to form a hierarchical trajectory tree

SEAlign: Alignment Training for Software Engineering Agent

Algorithm 1 Node Scoring and Critical Action Identification.
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:

procedure ComputeNodeScores(traj_tree)
scores, critical_actions, critical_pairs ← {}, {}, {} ⊲ Init
for each node ∈ PostOrderTraverse(traj_tree) do
if node is a leaf then
scores[node] ← 0 or 1 ⊲ Determined by the result
else
Successful path # from node
scores[node] ← Total path # from node
end if
if node has two children with score_diff > 0.5 then
critical_actions ← critical_actions ∪ {node}
critical_pair ←Paired partial trajs with preference
critical_pairs ← critical_pairs ∪ {critical_pair}
end if
end for
return scores, critical_actions, critical_pairs
end procedure

structure, where all trajectories for a particular task are integrated
into a unified structural representation.
As shown in Figure 2, for each task, we traverse the various trajectories and identify common prefixes across them. These shared
prefixes serve as decision pathways that are merged into a single
branch of the tree. By aligning identical steps across trajectories,
we create a tree structure where ❶ each non-leaf node refers to an
individual decision step (e.g., a tool invocation or an action taken
by the agent) and ❷ each leaf node represents the final outcomes
of the trajectory (i.e., success or failure of the task).
With the trajectory tree, SEAlign organizes agent action chains
into a hierarchical structure, allowing effective and efficient node
scoring and critical action analysis across trajectories. A filtration
procedure is further introduced to eliminate low-quality trajectories
that contribute little to the model’s performance. There are two
main filtering rules:
• Trajectories repeating the same actions for multiple steps without progress are eliminated, which often leads to the stuck-inloop issue;
• Trajectories that do not overlap in any meaningful way with
others are removed, which usually suggests irrelevant outliers.
This filtering procedure ensures that the dataset maintains a high
standard of quality and relevance, allowing the trajectory tree to
focus on representative pathways.

4.3

Node Scoring & Critical Action Extraction

After constructing the trajectory trees, SEAlign is allowed to identify critical pathways and actions, which significantly influence
the final results. Please refer to Algorithm 1. To achieve so, we
develop a node scoring mechanism based on the success rates
of subtrees emanating from each node. The scoring process is outlined as follows. ❶ For each leaf node, its score is assigned to 0 or
1 according to the final result. ❷ The score for a non-leaf node is
computed by propagation in a bottom-up manner – it is the fraction
of success path numbers over all paths in the node’s subtree. In
general, the scores reflect the plausible success rate of all possible
paths extending from this node.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Table 1: Statistics of Trajectories and Trajectory Trees
Metric

Collected
Trajectory

Instance #
Trajectory # (After Filtration)
– Successful Trajectory #
– Wrong Trajectory #
Avg. Token Len.

Trajectory
Tree

Avg. Path Len.
Critical Pair #

Value
186
3,168
677
2,491
∼19,868
∼41
983

With the assistance of node scores, SEAlign identifies critical
actions in the trajectory tree. If there is a significant difference
in the scores of two non-leaf nodes under the same parent node,
it indicates that these two non-leaf nodes correspond to a set of
critical actions, meaning they lead to vastly different outcomes (one
for a high success rate and the other for a high failure rate). In our
experimental setup, the threshold of score differences is set to 0.5.
During alignment training, we aim to train code models using these
critical action pairs to ensure that the models consistently produce
higher score actions – that is, actions associated with higher success
rates. Please refer to Table 1 for statistics of the collected trajectory
dataset.

4.4

Alignment with Preference Optimization

With the collected trajectory dataset and the critical actions, SEAlign
aligns open-source LLMs to high-score actions. Based on the trajectory dataset constructed above, and the critical action nodes
identified through the trajectory tree scoring mechanism, we perform subsequent alignment training on open-source models. The
entire post-training process consists of two phases: ❶ SFT with
correct trajectories, and ❷ Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
with critical action pairs.
SFT with Correct Trajectories. Before actual alignment, it is crucial to ensure that the target LLM can generate valid and appropriate
trajectories, and therefore SFT is needed. Given a collected correct
trajectory data sample (⟨𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑜 2, . . . ⟩), the target LLM should
learn the actions (𝑎 1, 𝑎 2, · · · ). Thus, during SFT, we mask out the
loss for the environment observations (𝑜 1, 𝑜 2, · · · ), and the loss is
formulated as:

LSFT = −Etraj∈ D

"𝑇
∑︁

#
log 𝑃 (𝑎𝑡 | 𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, . . . , 𝑎𝑡 −1, 𝑜𝑡 −1 ) ,

(3)

𝑡 =1

where 𝑇 is the total number of actions in the trajectory, and D is
the dataset of all correct trajectories.
Fine-grained DPO with Critical Action Pairs. A major challenge
of SFT is that most trajectories appear similar, with only a few
critical actions making a significant difference. After SFT, the target
LLM can generate valid actions in trajectories but requires further
alignment to produce "good" actions (i.e., those with higher success
rates). The target model is fundamentally limited in distinguishing
and optimizing for these critical actions. To tackle this challenge, we
adopt DPO [30], which introduces a preference-based mechanism

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Trovato et al.

that extends beyond maximizing the likelihood of ground truth data.
Previous studies have shown the promise of DPO in reasoning tasks
such as mathematics [14, 36, 43]. By utilizing pairs of preferred
responses (𝑦 + ) and dispreferred responses (𝑦 − ), DPO aligns the
model with human preferences, thereby enhancing its effectiveness
for tasks that require nuanced decision-making. In SEAlign, we
focus on the critical agentic actions. As introduced before, the
decision points which may significantly influence the final outcome
are collected. Each critical pair contains a correct partial trajectory
and a wrong partial trajectory, which share the same action prefix,
formulated as below:

of data scaling on SEAlign by varying the amount of training data.
This analysis shows how data size affects the ability of LLMs to
handle real-world software engineering tasks.
RQ5: How does SEAlign improve the user experience in realworld software development scenarios? In addition to quantitative analysis, we also conduct human evaluations to assess the
effectiveness of SEAlign in enhancing user experience. We construct
multiple applications using SEAlign, and study improvements in
user experience, in order to demonstrate the SEAlign framework’s
practical utility.

Critical Pair = ⟨𝑎𝑖+, 𝑎𝑖− | 𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, · · · , 𝑎𝑖 −1, 𝑜𝑖 −1 ⟩
(4)
+
where ⟨𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, · · · , 𝑎𝑖 ⟩ refers to the preferred “good” partial trajectory and ⟨𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, · · · , 𝑎𝑖− ⟩ refers to the dispreferred “bad” partial
trajectory. Remember that the score difference threshold is 0.5, Under the same partial trajectory condition (⟨𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, · · · , 𝑎𝑖 −1, 𝑜𝑖 −1 ⟩),
the preferred action (𝑎𝑖+ ) leads to much higher success rate, making
it critical. DPO can effectively help the code model to learn such
preference, and the loss is formally defined as below:

5.1

"
LDPO = −Etraj∈ D log 𝜎 𝛽 log

𝑃 (𝑎𝑖+ )
𝑃 ref (𝑎𝑖+ )

− 𝛽 log

𝑃 (𝑎𝑖− )
𝑃ref (𝑎𝑖− )

!#
(5)

where 𝑃 (·) is the policy model’s likelihood for making decisions,
and 𝑃ref (·) is the reference model’s likelihood. Note that all conditions in the formulation are neglected for a better view (e.g., 𝑃 (𝑎𝑖+ )
in Eq. 5 should have been 𝑃 (𝑎𝑖+ |𝑝, 𝑎 1, 𝑜 1, · · · , 𝑎𝑖 −1, 𝑜𝑖 −1 )).

5

Experimental Setups

To evaluate the effectiveness of SEAlign, we conduct a comprehensive large-scale study. We aim to answer the following research
questions (RQs):
RQ1: Does SEAlign improve the correctness of the generated
code on non-trivial real-world benchmarks? We apply SEAlign
to variants of SWE-Bench, i.e., SWE-Bench-Lite [12] and SWEBench-Verified [25]. Both benchmarks assess LLM’s capability to
handle non-trivial real-world software engineering tasks, such as
bug fixing and new feature implementation.
RQ2: Does SEAlign improve the agent capability on more general code-related tasks? According to the motivating example
in Section 3.2, LLMs often struggle to follow complex instructions
or have trouble in correctly utilizing tools in software engineering
agent workflows. To demonstrate that SEAlign enhances agent capability with minimal training overhead, we evaluate its performance
on a general code-related benchmark, namely HumanEvalFix [24].
RQ3: What is the impact of the fine-grained preference optimization method on agent capability in SEAlign? The data
construction and the loss formulation may have an influence upon
SEAlign. To demonstrate the effective design of SEAlign, we conduct ablation studies by comparing different training setups, including variations in dataset construction and key components of our
training loss formulation.
RQ4: How does data scaling influence the performance of
SEAlign? Data scaling is a crucial factor for modern LLMs, as it
reflects the efficiency of the training schema. We explore the impact

Benchmarks

We conduct our main experiments upon three benchmarks, i.e. SWEBench-Lite [12], SWE-Bench-Verified [25], and HumanEvalFix [24].
❶ SWE-Bench-Lite [12] is a subset of SWE-Bench. The original
SWE-Bench is a large-scale benchmark assessing the LLMs with
thousands real-world GitHub issues, spanning 12 popular Python
repositories. SWE-Bench closely simulates real-world software engineering scenarios, where models are tasked with fixing bugs or
implementing new features. To better accommodate functional bugfixing objectives, SWE-Bench-Lite is curated, containing 300 test
instances and 23 development instances sampled from SWE-Bench.
The instances in SWE-Bench-Lite are more self-contained, focusing on functional bug-fixing tasks. ❷ SWE-Bench-Verified [25] is
another variation of SWE-Bench. OpenAI employs human beings
to thoroughly validate instances in SWE-Bench, creating a humanvalidated dataset. SWE-Bench-Verified contains 500 verified test
instances in total. ❸ In addition to variants of SWE-Bench, we also
evaluate SEAlign on HumanEvalFix [24], which is a general debugging benchmark. The benchmark introduces bugs into each of the
164 HumanEval [3] solutions, and requires the model to correct
functions with subtle bugs, accompanied by relevant unit tests.
SWE-Bench-Lite and SWE-Bench-Verified are widely adopted
benchmarks for LLM-based software engineering agents. Following
prior works, we evaluate SEAlign on these two benchmarks for a
consistent and fair comparison. In contrast to the SWE-Bench family, HumanEvalFix is a bit simpler but much more generic, making
it a complementary testbed to assess SEAlign’s ability to improve
instruction-following capabilities within agentic frameworks. Note
that during data processing in the SEAlign pipeline, we exclude all
the repositories and code snippets used by these three benchmarks
to prevent data contamination.

5.2

Metrics

For SWE-Bench family, we employ the resolved rate as the primary
evaluation metric, which measures the percentage of successfully
resolved problems. In addition to the primary metric, we also include the following metrics for more detailed analysis [33]: ❶ empty
patch rate, which estimates the percentage of trajectories where no
code in the repository is edited, and ❷ stuck-in-loop rate, which
assesses the percentage of trajectories where the agent gets stuck in
an agentic loop by repeating the exact same action for 3 rounds. The
evaluations of the subject LLMs are limited by either a maximum
of 30 interaction turns or the model’s 32k context window length,
whichever is reached first.

SEAlign: Alignment Training for Software Engineering Agent

For HumanEvalFix, we use the pass rate on the provided unit
tests as the primary evaluation metric. As a complementary measurement, we also record the invalid patch rate, which indicates
the percentage of trajectories in which the generated patch is incomplete or empty. Both metrics evaluate the agent’s instructionfollowing capabilities under SEAlign.

5.3

Baselines

We evaluate widely adopted LLMs in the realm of code generation, focusing on Qwen-2.5-Coder-Instruct-7B and Qwen-2.5-CoderInstruct-14B [10]. These two models are post-trained from Qwen2.5-Coder using large-scale, million-level code-related datasets with
SFT and DPO. They represent the state-of-the-art LLMs, specialized
for coding, within their respective parameter size categories.
We adopt the OpenHands agentic framework [33] to construct
a training dataset and conduct alignment training for SEAlign.
OpenHands is a general-purpose agentic framework, which utilizes
the CodeActAgent strategy [32] for decision-making regarding both
tool usage and reasoning steps.

5.4

Training & Inference Setups

We leverage powerful general LLMs like DeepSeek-v3 to build
agents for data construction in SEAlign. The constructed dataset
focuses exclusively on Python, given its widespread usage and
relevance for software engineering tasks.
The maximum training epoch number is set to 10, and the bestperforming checkpoint is selected based on the lowest validation
loss. Learning rate is initialized to 3 × 10 −6 , equipped with a linear
scheduler and a warm-up phase at the start of training. Greedy
search is adopted during inference, as it ensures deterministic and
consistent results for evaluation.

6 Experimental Results
6.1 SWE-Bench Family (RQ1)
To answer RQ1, we first compare the results of SEAlign with
the baseline LLMs. The comparison evaluates the improvements
SEAlign achieves over widely used models (i.e., Qwen-2.5-CoderInstruct-7B and Qwen-2.5-Coder-Instruct-14B) in terms of resolved
rates on SWE-Bench-Lite and SWE-Bench-Verified. Detailed results
are presented in Table 2.
Results show that SEAlign achieves significant relative improvements over baseline LLMs. The baseline LLMs, including the 14B parameter variant, struggle to effectively utilize the agentic framework
to handle SWE-Bench tasks due to the misalignment issue, as discussed in Section 3.2. With alignment achieved through a relatively
small training cost across less than a thousand samples, SEAlign successfully resolves the misalignment between existing code models
and agentic frameworks. SEAlign significantly enhances the target
LLMs’ instruction following and tool utilization capabilities within
the agentic framework. Notably, SEAlign demonstrates remarkable improvements in addressing issues such as empty patches and
stuck-in-loop, highlighting the efficiency of our alignment method
in tackling real-world software engineering challenges.
We further compare the performance of SEAlign with other
state-of-the-art agent-based methods, including both commercial
applications and open-source approaches. As shown in Table 3,

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Table 2: Performance Comparisons on SWE-Bench-Lite and
SWE-Bench-Verified. “Empty”, “Stuck”, “Resolve” denote
empty patch, stuck-in-loop, and resolved reates, respectively.
Δ denotes the relative improvement between the baseline and
SEAlign. "Qwen-7B" is an abbreviation for Qwen2.5-CoderInstruct-7B, and "Qwen-14" follows the similar abbreviation.
Model

Empty(%) ↓

SWE-Bench-Lite

Stuck(%) ↓

Resolve(%) ↑

Δ(%) ↑

Instance # = 300

Qwen-7B
SEAlign-7B

53.0
22.0

45.3
24.0

1.0
15.0

+1400.0

Qwen-14B
SEAlign-14B

50.3
17.0

35.0
22.0

3.7
17.7

+378.3

SWE-Bench-Verified

Instance # = 500

Qwen-7B
SEAlign-7B

49.4
25.2

39.0
19.2

0.8
18.6

+2225.0

Qwen-14B
SEAlign-14B

52.0
22.8

27.8
15.6

2.8
21.8

+678.5

SEAlign consistently outperforms many of these state-of-the-art
methods in terms of task resolved rates on both SWE-Bench-Lite
and SWE-Bench-Verified.
Notably, SEAlign, using the same OpenHands agentic framework
and a 14B LLM, achieves the comparable performance of GPT-4o,
which is a commercial closed-source application. Considering the
intrinsic complexity of SWE-Bench tasks, the results are particularly surprising, highlighting the effectiveness of SEAlign. On the
other hand, among listed open-source methods, SEAlign achieves
the best results among LLMs with comparable parameter size, only
being outperformed by a few existing 72B models. Through this
comparison, we highlight the remarkable performance of the proposed method, which is achieved with a small training cost in this
highly competitive landscape.

6.2

HumanEvalFix (RQ2)

To evaluate whether SEAlign enhances an LLM’s ability to follow
complex instructions or correctly utilize tools in software engineering agentic workflows, we conduct experiments on HumanEvalFix,
which is a relatively simpler but broader and more popular benchmark. The results are listed in Table 4. It is important to note that
the dataset constructed by SEAlign does not include any data related to HumanEvalFix. Additionally, the data styles and formats
are significantly different between the two. This ensures that there
is no risk of data leakage. We would like to elaborate that SEAlign
exhibits generalizability and adaptability in RQ2.
Results highlight that SEAlign significantly improves task success rates and reduces the invalid patch rate compared to baseline
LLMs within the agentic framework. We also evaluate the performance of directly using the model to solve the task without
any agentic framework. For the baseline Qwen models, there is a
clear performance gap between using and not using the agentic
framework. In contrast, our proposed SEAlign demonstrates robustness across both forms of workflow, achieving high performance

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Trovato et al.

Table 3: Comparisons with State-of-the-Art Agent Methods.
Model /
Params

Method

SWE-Bench
Verified (%)

Lite (%)

7.0

4.3

Closed-source Methods
Claude-3

SWE-agent [39]
-Opus

RAG [12]
RepoGraph [27]

GPT-4

2.8
-

2.7
19.0

GPT-4o

31.8

21.0
30.7
22.0
20.7

-Sonnet

33.6
50.8

23.0
40.7

Open-source Methods
SWE-Llama RAG [12]
AutoCodeRover [18, 46]
SWE-Gym [28]
SWE-Gym [28]
SWE-Gym [28]
Lingma SWE-GPT [22]
SWE-Fixer [38]

13B
72B
7B
14B
32B
72B
72B

1.2
10.6
16.4
20.6
30.2
32.8

1.0
9.3
10.0
12.7
15.3
22.0
24.7

SEAlign (Ours)
SEAlign (Ours)

7B
14B

18.6
21.8

15.0
17.7

OpenHands [33]
AutoCodeRover [46]
SWE-SynInfer [22]
Agentless [37]
Moatless Tools [23]
OpenHands [33]

Claude-3.5

Empty(%) ↓

Resolve(%) ↑

Qwen-14B (w/o all)
SEAlign-14B (w/ all)

50.3
17.0

3.7
17.7

Ablations on Training Stage
w/ SFT, w/o Fine-grained DPO
w/o SFT, w/ Fine-grained DPO

22.0
24.3

13.0
10.7

Ablations on Fine-grained Score
w/o Fine-grained Score
41.3

5.3

Method

Table 6: Data Scaling for SEAlign on SWE-Bench-Lite. The
percentage values indicates the data ratio utilized for alignment training.
Empty(%) ↓

Resolve(%) ↑

Data Scaling
Qwen-14B (0%)
25%
50%
75%
SEAlign-14B (100%)

50.3
35.0
28.7
22.0
17.0

3.7
9.0
13.7
16.0
17.7

Iterative DPO in Sec. 7.3
+ 50% on-policy dataset

17.0

16.3

Method

Table 4: Performance Comparisons on HumanEvalFix. “Invalid” denotes the invalid patch rate within the agentic mode.
"Qwen-7B" is an abbreviation for Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct7B, and "Qwen-14" follows the similar abbreviation.
Agent

Pass@1 (%) ↑

Invalid (%) ↓

Qwen-7B

w/o
w/

46.9
18.9

60.4

Qwen-14B

w/o
w/

54.3
31.1

43.3

SEAlign-7B

w/o
w/

46.3
55.5

13.4

SEAlign-14B

w/o
w/

52.4
62.8

10.4

Model

Table 5: Ablation Studies on SWE-Bench-Lite.

either with or without the agentic framework. Interestingly, we
observe that incorporating the agentic framework further enhances
accuracy for SEAlign. This improvement can be attributed to the
agentic framework’s provision of appropriate tools (such as executor), which facilitate code-related task resolution. These findings
demonstrate that a well-aligned LLM for code obtained by SEAlign,
in combination with a compatible agentic framework, can achieve
improved generalization across a broader range of code-related
tasks.

6.3

Ablation Studies (RQ3)

To answer RQ3, we evaluate the improvement at each training
stage introduced in Section 4.4. Specifically, we analyze the effects
of SFT and fine-grained DPO on final performance. Additionally,
we assess the impact of SEAlign ’s carefully designed components,
including the computation of fine-grained scores in our DPO setting,
as shown in Table 5.
Results show that the DPO stage can further enhance the model’s
instruction-following capabilities within agentic frameworks, building upon the foundation provided by the SFT stage. Both stages
are crucial for achieving the final improvements in performance.
Besides the training stages, the fine-grained scoring mechanism in
our DPO setting plays a critical role. When critical action identification is omitted and DPO is applied directly to positive and negative
samples (the entire trajectories that succeed or fail) of the same
task, the results degrade significantly. This fine-grained preference
optimization contributes substantially to task success rates by aligning LLMs’ critical decision-making at key steps. These alignments
on critical actions have a profound impact on the model’s final
performance.

6.4

Data Scaling Law for SEAlign (RQ4)

To address RQ4, we investigate the impact of scaling training data
on the performance of SEAlign. We evaluate SEAlign using training
data proportions of 25%, 50%, and 75%, and analyze their respective
impacts on model performance. As listed in Table 6, training with

SEAlign: Alignment Training for Software Engineering Agent

more data examples consistently enhances the performance of the
target LLM.
However, further scaling is constrained due to limitations such
as extended execution time and the resource costs associated with
constructing larger-scale datasets. For detailed discussions on time
and efficiency, please refer to Section 7.2. In our experiments, we
balance performance gains with training costs, ensuring that improvements are achieved cost-effectively. Future work will explore
efficient data scaling methods to investigate SEAlign ’s performance
upper bounds under extreme training budgets.

6.5

Table 7: User Experience Evaluation on Real-World Software Engineering Tasks. Results compare Qwen2.5-CoderInstruct-14B and SEAlign-14B. Each task is scored by five
developers on a scale from 1 to 5, where 5 represents the best,
and the average score is calculated. Tasks are ordered from
top to bottom based on difficulty, and ranked from simplest
to most complex according to evaluator assessments.
Task

Model

Func.

Quality

Aesthetic Appeal

Homepage

Qwen
SEAlign

1.7
3.0

3.3
3.7

2.7
3.0

Weather

Qwen
SEAlign

1.0
3.0

2.0
3.0

1.0
2.3

News

Qwen
SEAlign

4.0
4.3

4.3
4.3

3.3
4.0

To-do

Qwen
SEAlign

1.3
3.7

3.0
3.3

1.7
4.3

Snake

Qwen
SEAlign

1.0
1.7

1.0
3.0

1.3
2.3

Avg.

Qwen
SEAlign

1.8
3.1

2.7
3.5

2.0
3.2

User Experience (RQ5)

To answer RQ5, we follow the application demo settings of OpenHands [33] and manually design five real-world development tasks:
❶ a to-do list web application, ❷ a snake game, ❸ a weather forecasting application, ❹ a Hacker News query application, and ❺ a
personalized homepage. For each task, we employ both baseline
models (i.e., Qwen-based models) and SEAlign within the OpenHands framework to automate development. Five independent volunteer evaluators, each with one year or more software developing
experience, were invited to assess the results from three distinct
perspectives: functionality completeness, code quality (e.g., readability and adherence to coding standards), and aesthetic appeal.
Additionally, we invited all evaluators to rank the five tasks by
difficulty. The ranking results, along with corresponding human
evaluation metrics, are summarized in Table 7.
Results in Table 7 show that SEAlign significantly enhances user
experience in real-world development scenarios and demonstrates
its practical utility. A to-do list case is presented in Figure 3, where
Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct-14B struggles to produce a fully functional
application, while SEAlign successfully completes all required features perfectly2 . Upon further analyzing the agent execution chains,
we find that the Qwen2.5 model frequently encounters issues such
as incorrect tool invocation and failure to follow instructions. These
errors cause the agentic framework to spend most of its time handling exceptions and recovering from erroneous steps, significantly
hindering task completion. In contrast, SEAlign addresses these
shortcomings effectively. With minimal training overhead, SEAlign
achieves strong alignment with real-world software engineering
scenarios, greatly improving the usability of open-source models
in complex software development tasks and agentic frameworks.

7 Discussions & Future Work
7.1 Generalization across Agentic Frameworks
Just as experienced human programmers skillfully utilize their
preferred Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), LLMs optimized for specific agents can effectively leverage tools to address
complex problems. As demonstrated in our experiments in RQ1,
even relatively small-scale LLMs, when subjected to frameworkspecific alignment, can achieve a high degree of proficiency in
agentic frameworks, thereby unlocking new possibilities for automation and broader applications.
However, a key question remains – can LLMs trained on one
specific agentic framework generalize to others? To address this,
2 Please

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

refer to our open-source reproduction package [2] for other cases.

Figure 3: Case study on creating a to-do list web application with OpenHands agentic framework compared with
Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct-14B and SEAlign-14B.

we conduct experiments to evaluate the generalization capability of
SEAlign. Specifically, a model optimized for the OpenHands framework using SEAlign is evaluated on the AutoCodeRover framework
[46]. While OpenHands is a flexible and general-purpose agentic
framework capable of dynamic tool calls, AutoCodeRover relies on
domain-specific, pre-defined workflows that provide the model with
different tools at various stages to solve corresponding subproblems.
We still employ Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct-14B and SEAlign-14B to

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Trovato et al.

Table 8: Alignment Generalization Across OpenHands and
AutoCoderRover on SWE-Bench-Lite. SEAlign only use OpenHands framework to construct training dataset.
Agentic Framework

Model

Resolve Rate (%) ↑

OpenHands

Qwen-14B
SEAlign-14B
GPT-4o

3.7
17.7
21.0

AutoCodeRover

Qwen-14B
SEAlign-14B
GPT-4o

2.0
5.7
30.7

evaluate their performance. In addition, we also compare with the
close-sourced powerful LLM, GPT-4o [7].
The experimental results, presented in Table 8, show that while
the aligned LLM, transferred from OpenHands to AutoCodeRover,
achieves reasonable performance improvements over the unaligned
baseline, its performance remains significantly lower than that of
powerful closed-source models such as GPT-4o. Notably, SEAlign14B achieves comparable performance with GPT-4o on the OpenHands framework, while on the AutoCoderRover framework, the
performance gap widens substantially. These observations indicate that while proprietary alignment methods are highly effective
within specific agentic workflows, additional training strategies are
still essential to enhance cross-framework adaptability.

7.2

Overhead for Execution Validation

Although SEAlign requires minimal training overhead and a small
number of data samples, one of the main bottlenecks lies in the inefficiency and significant computational overhead associated with
execution validation. This challenge impacts both the scalability of SEAlign and the feasibility of applying similar alignment
training methods to large-scale datasets for software engineering
agentic tasks. During our experiments, substantial computational
and storage resources are required. ❶ Approximately 1TB of free
disk space is needed for intermediate outputs. ❷ Using a 16-CPU
server, it takes nearly 5 minutes to complete execution validation
for a single sample with the official docker platform [12, 28].
As a result, constructing training datasets and running experimental evaluations involved significant time and resource costs.
Scaling alignment methods like SEAlign to larger datasets or more
environments will therefore require solving the challenge of execution validation efficiency. Optimizing this step, perhaps by employing lightweight performance estimations or other efficiency
strategies, can be critical for future improvements in scalability and
practicality.

typically utilize online training environments, leveraging highquality datasets and carefully designed reward systems. However,
this comes at the cost of requiring substantial training resources
and computational overhead.
In contrast, offline alignment techniques [30], which is adopted
by SEAlign, approximate similar optimization objectives while introducing necessary simplifications. For example, SEAlign leverages
pre-generated trajectory datasets and critical node optimization
methods instead of conducting resource-intensive online sampling.
This design choice reduces computational costs and enables straightforward implementation in constrained environments.
To further explore the potential of advanced RL-based techniques,
we perform a simplified experiment using an online iterative DPO
approach [29]. We use the additional 50% on-policy dataset based on
SEAlign and results are shown in Table 6. However, results suggest
that this method shows limited improvement. A detailed comparison of how SEAlign performs relative to advanced RL alignment
techniques in both effectiveness and efficiency remains an open
question.

7.4

In this section, we outline potential threats to the validity of our
study and address measures taken to mitigate them.
Threats to Internal Validity. Threats to internal validity are related to the dataset collection process and hyperparameter settings
used during training. In our experiments, the quality and diversity
of the trajectories could influence the model’s ability to generalize
across different tasks. Additionally, hyperparameter choices such
as the learning rate may impact the final performance. While we
conduct ablation studies to ensure robustness, there remains a possibility that certain experimental configurations may bias results.
Threats to External Validity. External validity threats are related
to the tasks and datasets selected for evaluation. Our study relies
on benchmarks such as SWE-Bench-Lite, SWE-Bench-Verified, and
HumanEvalFix, which simulate real-world software engineering
scenarios. However, these benchmarks may not fully capture the
diversity and complexity of all possible software engineering tasks.
The results may therefore not generalize to other tasks or repositories beyond those included in the benchmarks.
Threats to Construct Validity. Construct validity threats are
related to the evaluation metrics used to assess model performance.
In this work, we primarily rely on resolve rate, which measures
the percentage of successfully completed tasks. While this metric
provides a direct assessment of task success, it may not fully capture
other aspects of model performance, such as efficiency, code quality,
or usability in real-world scenarios.

8
7.3

Comparison with Advanced RL Techniques

While our study demonstrates the effectiveness of SEAlign, we have
not extensively compared it with advanced reinforcement learning
(RL) alignment techniques, such as DeepSeek-R1 [8]. RL-based
alignment models, including those trained with methods like GRPO
[31], have shown strong performance in reasoning scenarios such
as mathematics and competition-level code tasks. These techniques

Threats to Validity

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce SEAlign, a novel alignment framework
designed to address the gap between existing code model training
methods and the requirements of real-world software engineering agents. SEAlign leverages unique characteristics of software
development processes, including the identification of critical decision points, fine-grained alignment and preference optimization,
enabling models to better handle complex software engineering

SEAlign: Alignment Training for Software Engineering Agent

tasks within agentic frameworks. Our experimental results demonstrate that SEAlign achieves state-of-the-art performance across
multiple benchmarks designed to simulate real-world software engineering challenges. Additionally, we apply SEAlign to real-world
software engineering scenarios, successfully automating the creation of several small applications. We are convinced that ongoing
advancements in alignment techniques, scalability, and broader
applicability will significantly accelerate the realization of fully
automated software engineering powered by LLMs.

References
[1] Miltiadis Allamanis, Earl T Barr, Premkumar Devanbu, and Charles Sutton. 2018.
A survey of machine learning for big code and naturalness. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 51, 4 (2018), 1–37.
[2] Authors of this paper. 2025. Available reproduction package of this paper. https:
//anonymous.4open.science/r/SWEAlign.
[3] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde
De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[4] Codeforces. 2009. https://codeforces.com. (2009).
[5] Leonidas Gee, Milan Gritta, Gerasimos Lampouras, and Ignacio Iacobacci. 2024.
Code-Optimise: Self-Generated Preference Data for Correctness and Efficiency.
CoRR abs/2406.12502 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2406.12502 arXiv:2406.12502
[6] GPT-4. 2023. https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-4-and-gpt-4-turbo.
OpenAI (2023).
[7] GPT-4o. 2024. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/. OpenAI (2024).
[8] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin
Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025. Deepseek-r1:
Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025).
[9] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang,
Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Yu Wu, YK Li, et al. 2024. DeepSeek-Coder: When the
Large Language Model Meets Programming–The Rise of Code Intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.14196 (2024).
[10] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu
Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Kai Dang, An Yang, Rui Men, Fei Huang, Xingzhang
Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2024. Qwen2.5-Coder
Technical Report. CoRR abs/2409.12186 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2409.12186
arXiv:2409.12186
[11] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida
Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. 2024. Livecodebench:
Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974 (2024).
[12] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press,
and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2023. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve
Real-world Github Issues?. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
[13] Komal Kumar, Tajamul Ashraf, Omkar Thawakar, Rao Muhammad Anwer,
Hisham Cholakkal, Mubarak Shah, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Phillip H. S. Torr, Salman
Khan, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. 2025. LLM Post-Training: A Deep Dive into
Reasoning Large Language Models. arXiv:2502.21321 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/
abs/2502.21321
[14] Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Senqiao Yang, Xiangru Peng, and Jiaya Jia.
2024. Step-dpo: Step-wise preference optimization for long-chain reasoning of
llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18629 (2024).
[15] LeetCode. 2018. https://leetcode.com. (2018).
[16] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi
Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. 2022.
Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science 378, 6624 (2022),
1092–1097.
[17] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. 2024. Deepseek-v3
technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 (2024).
[18] Xiangyan Liu, Bo Lan, Zhiyuan Hu, Yang Liu, Zhicheng Zhang, Fei Wang, Michael
Shieh, and Wenmeng Zhou. 2024. Codexgraph: Bridging large language models
and code repositories via code graph databases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03910
(2024).
[19] Llama. 2023. https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat. (2023).
[20] Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Federico Cassano, Joel LamyPoirier, Nouamane Tazi, Ao Tang, Dmytro Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei,
et al. 2024. Starcoder 2 and the stack v2: The next generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.19173 (2024).

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

[21] Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xiubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu,
Chongyang Tao, Jing Ma, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. 2023. Wizardcoder:
Empowering code large language models with evol-instruct. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.08568 (2023).
[22] Yingwei Ma, Rongyu Cao, Yongchang Cao, Yue Zhang, Jue Chen, Yibo Liu, Yuchen
Liu, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2024. Lingma swe-gpt: An open
development-process-centric language model for automated software improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00622 (2024).
[23] Moatless. 2024. https://github.com/aorwall/moatless-tools. (2024).
[24] Niklas Muennighoff, Qian Liu, Armel Zebaze, Qinkai Zheng, Binyuan Hui,
Terry Yue Zhuo, Swayam Singh, Xiangru Tang, Leandro von Werra, and Shayne
Longpre. 2023. OctoPack: Instruction Tuning Code Large Language Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07124 (2023).
[25] OpenAI. 2024. https://openai.com/index/introducing-swe-bench-verified. (2024).
[26] OpenAI-o3. 2024. https://openai.com/index/openai-o3-mini. (2024).
[27] Siru Ouyang, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Zilin Xiao, Zhihan Zhang, Mengzhao Jia,
Jiawei Han, Hongming Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2024. RepoGraph: Enhancing
AI Software Engineering with Repository-level Code Graph. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.14684 (2024).
[28] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr,
and Yizhe Zhang. 2024. Training Software Engineering Agents and Verifiers with
SWE-Gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.21139 (2024).
[29] Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Weizhe Yuan, He He, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar
Sukhbaatar, and Jason Weston. 2024. Iterative reasoning preference optimization.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 116617–116637.
[30] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano
Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2024. Direct preference optimization: Your language
model is secretly a reward model. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 36 (2024).
[31] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei
Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing
the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300 (2024).
[32] Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng,
and Heng Ji. 2024. Executable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning.
[33] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen
Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. 2024. Openhands: An
open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations.
[34] Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel
Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2022. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560 (2022).
[35] Yuxiang Wei, Zhe Wang, Jiawei Liu, Yifeng Ding, and Lingming Zhang. 2023.
Magicoder: Source code is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02120 (2023).
[36] Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan
Gu. 2024. Self-play preference optimization for language model alignment. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.00675 (2024).
[37] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2024.
Agentless: Demystifying llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.01489 (2024).
[38] Chengxing Xie, Bowen Li, Chang Gao, He Du, Wai Lam, Difan Zou, and Kai
Chen. 2025. SWE-Fixer: Training Open-Source LLMs for Effective and Efficient
GitHub Issue Resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05040 (2025).
[39] John Yang, Carlos Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable
automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 37 (2024), 50528–50652.
[40] Yixin Ye, Zhen Huang, Yang Xiao, Ethan Chern, Shijie Xia, and Pengfei Liu. 2025.
LIMO: Less is More for Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03387 (2025).
[41] Dylan Zhang, Shizhe Diao, Xueyan Zou, and Hao Peng. 2024. PLUM: Preference Learning Plus Test Cases Yields Better Code Language Models. CoRR
abs/2406.06887 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2406.06887 arXiv:2406.06887
[42] Huangzhao Zhang, Kechi Zhang, Zhuo Li, Jia Li, Jia Li, Yongmin Li, Yunfei Zhao,
Yuqi Zhu, Fang Liu, Ge Li, et al. 2024. Deep learning for code generation: a survey.
Science China Information Sciences 67, 9 (2024), 191101.
[43] Kechi Zhang, Ge Li, Yihong Dong, Jingjing Xu, Jun Zhang, Jing Su, Yongfei Liu,
and Zhi Jin. 2024. CodeDPO: Aligning Code Models with Self Generated and
Verified Source Code. CoRR abs/2410.05605 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2410.
05605 arXiv:2410.05605
[44] Kechi Zhang, Jia Li, Ge Li, Xianjie Shi, and Zhi Jin. 2024. CodeAgent: Enhancing
Code Generation with Tool-Integrated Agent Systems for Real-World Repo-level
Coding Challenges. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 13643–13658.
[45] Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang,
Jiwei Li, Runyi Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, et al. 2023. Instruction tuning for
large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10792 (2023).

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

[46] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 1592–1604.

Trovato et al.

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009

